[AUDIO LOGO]
[CHEERING]
>>DAVE ASPREY: Biohacking.
It's not just about being well.
It's about being more than well.
It's the power to
transform yourself.
Are we ready?
I'm Dave Asprey.
And this is Biohacking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hi, I'm Dave Asprey.
A part of biohacking is
resilience and recovery.
And the reason for
this is that people
who are attracted
to biohacking, we're
the people who want control
over our own biology.
We want to be able
to bring it no matter
what life brings our way.
And that leads to
the temptation, one
that I've certainly fallen
to at times in my life--
you do more than your body
really is ready to handle.
And with biohacking,
you can do it
as long as you use
biohacking to then recover
faster and further than
mother nature normally
would have let you.
In other words, you
can still hit the wall.
But with biohacking, you can
move the wall really far out.
So this episode is
all about teaching
you resilience and
recovery techniques
because you may be
burned out right now.
And you may need this right now.
Or you may learn how to
stress your body even
more with exercise
to get great results
but only if you
recover properly.
So these are the things
that let you recover faster
in less time.
They'll let you go out
of fight or flight mode
into rest and reset mode
so that you can reduce
your overall stress levels.
And that just makes you happier.
You want to live a long time?
You have to learn how
to be happy and not
be stressed all the time.
And you have to learn how to
handle stress like a boss.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Interestingly, for the first
time in recent history,
in surveys, people are
asking for stress management
more than they're asking
for abs or weight loss.
This is unprecedented
because we are more
stressed than we've ever been.
Maybe it's social media.
Maybe it's government
interventions.
Maybe it's your mother-in-law.
Only you know what the
source of your stress is.
But, societally, it seems
like everyone has more stress
than they did before.
And what we're looking
at is resilience.
Resilience means that you can
choose your state regardless
of what happens in
the world around you.
So you can take a hit.
And you can bounce back.
And the hit could be a
change in your employment.
It could be some bad news.
It could be got sick
and then you recovered.
But resilient people, they
can handle hard times.
And they come back either
stronger or just as good
as they were before.
And people who are
weak, because they
don't have the resilience
built into their biology,
are more likely to
take a hit and then
fall into a victim mindset,
to fall into chronic illness,
to fall into
depression and anxiety.
And if that's happened to
you, you can climb out.
And you can build a
resilient body, which
then leads to a resilient mind.
If you're someone who could
use resilience right now,
here are some signs.
You have a hard time going
to sleep or staying asleep.
Your resting heart rate is high.
If you track your heart rate
variability on a sleep tracker,
you have low heart
rate variability, which
is a sure sign of burnout.
And if you feel
overwhelmed all the time,
you feel like you just
can't handle whatever
life is bringing your way--
and today wasn't
even that bad anyway.
But you just can't handle it.
This anxiety and overwhelm,
it's not a moral failing.
It doesn't mean that
you're a bad person.
It doesn't mean
that you're weak.
It means that your body
is highly stressed.
So it's sending
you signals to make
you feel like you can't handle
things because it's worried
that it can't handle things.
And that is because your
body has figured out
that it isn't going to
take very much to throw you
into a state of disequilibrium.
Normally, your body manages
everything in the world
around you automatically.
But when you get tipped
too far in one direction,
the body feels like it
can't recover from that.
And it's going to
get stuck there.
So it makes you feel
a sense of unease.
It's trying to make you
change what you're doing.
Now, there are good
types of stress.
And a lot of biohacking,
especially the fitness episode,
is about using stress
to craft the body
and mind and nervous
system that you want.
Instant on or
quick on, quick off
stress that allows your body
to leave equilibrium and then
come right back quickly.
That builds more resilience.
Bad stress is when
you say, well, I'm
going to start exercising.
So I'll do two hours
a day for 75 days
straight because
I saw it online.
That's going to put your body
into a state of disequilibrium,
where your body doesn't return
back to equilibrium because it
was more stress than
you could handle then.
Or it might return.
But it might take you a year
or six weeks or six months.
Most of us get stuck in
fight or flight mode.
When your sympathetic
nervous system is turned on
and stays on-- sympathetic
is the part of your body
that says, get ready for stress
and optimize for instant energy
availability.
Don't build up health.
Don't build up resilience.
Don't build up strength
because there's
a tiger in the room with you.
And why would you
invest in the future
when there's a danger right now?
Even though you know
there's no danger right now,
it doesn't matter.
Your nervous system
and your body
believe that there's a danger.
And they're in
charge of themselves
until you take charge
of them with biohacking.
One of the easiest and
most surprising ways
to build more resilience is just
to give the body the minerals,
the vitamins, fats,
proteins, amino acids
that it needs to
be able to handle
what's in the world around you.
If you want to
feel stressed, make
sure you have nutrient
deficiencies because then
the body feels helpless.
It's like, well,
there's a stressor.
I want to build more resilience.
But I don't have the
materials to build it.
Therefore, anxiety.
Body feels anxiety
from lack of nutrients.
You feel anxiety.
But you might blame
someone at work
even though your
anxiety came from you.
The number one fastest
way to build resilience
is to learn how to
get better sleep.
And there's a whole
episode on that for you.
But I'll summarize some
of the things for you.
When you sleep, especially
the first half of the night--
going to bed earlier
helps for this--
your body releases
signaling substances,
like human growth
hormone and testosterone.
And it tells your cells
to repair and grow.
So going to bed a little bit
earlier, even if you don't want
to, and doing some of the sleep
hacks from the episode on sleep
can radically improve
your resilience.
Just one night of sleep,
that's good quality sleep,
can help you handle things
40% better the next day.
Another thing that
will drive resilience
is giving yourselves more energy
because the body with more
energy is less stress.
And you can use light
hacking for this.
Certain frequencies
of light activate
a part of your
mitochondrial network
called cytochrome c oxidase.
That causes your mitochondria to
make better use of ATP energy.
And a lot of people
don't know this.
But cytochrome c oxidase is
what's called a chromophore.
That means it's a color
sensing molecule that absorbs
specific wavelengths of light.
And we know that it absorbs
between 600 to 800 nanometer
light, which means
red and infrared.
So if you have a red or
infrared light therapy device,
you can do 20 or 30 minutes
a day with a red light panel.
It reduces inflammation,
pain, increases collagen,
speeds wound healing.
But for resilience, put a red
light panel, and better yet
a red and amber light
panel, over your stomach.
And let it sit there
while you're working.
And just watch what happens
because your vagal nerve that
controls a lot of stress,
it goes through the gut.
So you can calm the body and
reduce your stress response
just with red, infrared, and
amber light over the abdomen.
There's a square
light panel that's
lightweight that you can get
that will go into your shirt.
And you can just do
that for a few minutes
a day, even before bed.
The idea is that
you're turning off
fight or flight using light and
turning on energy production.
More energy equals less stress.
More nutrients, less stress.
And those are the
kinds of stress
that are not emotional stress.
But they feel like
emotional stress.
Next up, you could do what
ancient Chinese and Russian
militaries learned to do.
They found herbs that would
help their soldiers turn
on the stress response
when they needed it
and then quickly turn it
off when they were done.
Those herbs today are
called adaptogens.
And they can help
you resist stress.
But most importantly, when
you need a stress response,
it's effortless
to get some stress
and effortless to turn it off.
So it makes stress feel
like less than it is.
And it helps your body
maintain that stable state.
Adaptogens will re-regulate
your endocrine system,
your nervous system,
your immune system,
even your digestive system.
The top three that you
should consider taking,
things that I take, are
ashwagandha, ginseng,
and rhodiola.
If you find a supplement with
some combination of those
in it, you might find
results like you'll
find in the studies.
One study shows
ashwagandha decreases
stress by 14.5% to 27.9% in
healthy but stressed people.
And eleuthero, which
is Siberian ginseng,
amplifies immune function
and suppresses stress.
Holy basil is my
all time favorite.
It's anti-stress.
It even helps with high
cholesterol and depression
if high cholesterol
is even an issue.
Adaptogens are safe for the
vast majority of people.
But if you're under
a lot of stress,
you may want to
increase your doses.
And as always, check
with the doctor
if you're on
prescription medications.
You could also consider
teaching your body
to be more resilient using
cold and heat therapy.
When your body
realizes you could
go from normal temperature to
very, very cold, as in an ice
bath or cryotherapy, or
to a very hot temperature,
as in a sauna or infrared sauna,
it can improve your resilience.
Because during that
extreme cold temperature,
even though it's
only three minutes,
your body, with
its own awareness,
kind of thinks, I might
die, and I might never
have babies if I can't
figure out how to stay warm.
So it turns on the capability
to become really warm really
quickly.
Now, why would that matter?
Because in order to
do that, your body
has to go in and
find the weak cells
and remove them and replace
them with stronger cells.
And three days of cold showers
or ice baths or cryotherapy
is all it takes to change
the amount of cardiolipin
in your mitochondrial membrane.
You don't have to know
the science behind that.
But what that means is
your body becomes better
at making heat, which
means it becomes
better metabolically,
which means
you can handle more stress.
For more than 10
years, I've been
writing about how you
can cool specific body
parts to increase endurance
and strength output just
for local areas.
But a whole body ice bath
or whole body cold shower
can do wonders for you.
And if you're doing
saunas and then ice,
you always do the
sauna first and the ice
last so that your body has to
learn how to warm itself up.
And if you're completely
blown out by stress today,
maybe you don't need to
freeze as well because cold
is a stressor on the body.
So if you're already at
the very end of your rope,
maybe that's not what
you need right now.
And here's a hack for you.
It's expensive to go to
the convenience store
and buy a bunch of ice and
throw it in your bathtub.
It takes a long time.
And almost no one's
going to do that.
And if there's not
a local clinic that
offers cryotherapy,
which is what I prefer,
here's the hack for you.
Get a salad bowl as
big as your face.
Put an inch of water in it.
Freeze it.
The next morning or
the next evening,
whenever you want
to do ice therapy,
put some cold tap water
in on top of the ice
until the water is very cold.
You take a deep breath.
And you bend forward.
And you stick your face,
just your face, in the water.
And keep it there
as long as you can.
And then when you need
to breathe, take it out.
Breathe.
Put it back in.
Aim for doing a minute or two.
You won't make it
a minute or two.
You'll make it about 20
seconds if you're lucky.
And after that, you'll
say, cold headache.
Why did Dave tell me to do this?
Well, just keep doing
it for three days.
And on the fourth day, it'll
magically be just fine.
That's when your mitochondrial
membrane became more resilient.
Now, if you're using sauna
as part of your resilience,
a sauna will create something
called heat shock proteins that
help to repair
misfolded proteins that
make you stronger.
We used to think you had
to replace bad proteins.
But it turns out
with enough heat,
the body will unfold
a protein that's
malfunctioning and then
refold it properly,
which is super cool.
It also lowers blood pressure,
improves circulation,
helps relaxation, and
increases tissue oxygenation.
All of those decrease anxiety
and increase resilience
in your body.
So should you do 20 minutes
of sauna three times a week?
Yes.
Should you do one to three
minutes of cold shower or ice
or cryo most days of the week?
Yes.
Is that going to
make you live longer?
Almost certainly.
It'll certainly make
you live better.
There's also a
breathwork that can have
profound effects on resilience.
One of the gold standards is
used by special forces and Navy
SEALs.
And it's called box breath.
Let's do it right now.
You're going to breathe out.
And then we're going to
breathe in for five seconds.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
You can hold for five.
Then we're going to breathe
out for five slowly.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
You're going to hold for five.
1 2, 3, 4, 5.
Now, if you continue that
cycle for 6 or 10 breaths,
it will take your body out
of fight or flight mode
and put you into rest and reset.
It literally resets
your nervous system.
It's not that hard to do.
There's a more advanced breath
called ujjayi breath from yoga
that works very, very well.
To do this, you breathe
in through your nose.
And you constrict
your throat, kind
of like you're about to snore.
And it sounds like a seashell.
Some people call this
the seashell breath.
And when you can do this,
it'll sound like this.
You breathe slowly
through the nose.
You can breathe
out the same way.
That will very quickly
put you to sleep at night.
And it'll take you out of
a very stressful situation.
You can do it a
little bit quieter,
even in a meeting with your
boss when he's being a jerk.
So remember box breath
and ujjayi breath.
You can do either one
of them at a stoplight.
And when you're
doing cold therapy,
there are specific
styles of breathing
that I'm not going to teach
you in the time we have here,
things like Wim Hof style
breathing or Tibetan fire
breaths that can make
cold therapy easier to do.
Another thing that
works really, really
well is if you're carrying a
lot of stress in your body,
you can lie on the floor
on your back, which
allows your blood pressure
to return to baseline more
quickly.
And you do box breathing
at the same time
only through your nose.
That is sort of
the very big gun.
You're not going to do this
at work probably unless you
have a place to lie down.
On your back, in and
out, five seconds
on each side of the box.
And you will very quickly
feel like you took a nap.
It's amazing.
Now, what's controlling all
of this stress in the body?
Well, there's a nerve
called the vagus nerve
or the wandering nerve.
It's the largest
nerve in your body.
And it controls fight
or flight and rest
and reset, your sympathetic
and parasympathetic.
And it starts in the brain,
goes down through your neck,
and innervates your entire gut.
So it's a single nerve.
And when that's working well,
then you have less stress.
When it's not working well,
your heartbeat changes.
And a bunch of
other things happen.
So I'm going to teach you
here how to change your heart
rate variability because that's
something that matters greatly.
And it gives you control
over your vagal nerve.
So your heart beats
are not all equal.
In a healthy person
without stress,
your heart rate
isn't evenly spaced.
If you have 60 beats per minute
and there's one every second,
you're actually really stressed.
But if you have 60
beats per minute
and they're kind of
randomly distributed
over that 60 seconds, you're
exceptionally healthy.
We're not talking about
changing your heart rate.
We're talking about
changing how your heart
rate is spread around.
So increasing your heart rate
or lowering your resting heart
rate, that's not this.
This is a measure of stress.
And you can teach
yourself to adapt
to sudden physical and
psychological challenges
by having a higher
heart rate variability.
That directly correlates to
an adaptable nervous system.
If you have an anxiety
disorder, excessive cortisol,
you have inflammation, or
you're just overtraining
and under sleeping
or drinking a lot,
your heart rate
variability will go down.
If you didn't recover
from your last workout,
heart rate variability is low.
And you can measure
heart rate variability
in the morning on most
sleep trackers today.
You can even find technology
online with biofeedback
that lets you directly train
your heart rate variability
if the breathwork
you just learned
doesn't already do it for you.
If you target your vagus
nerve, as a biohacker,
you can raise heart
rate variability.
If you increase the strength
of your vagal nerve, which
is called vagal tone, it
increases your heart rate
variability.
One of the best ways to
increase your vagal tone
is cold therapy on
your face and neck,
like the trick you
just learned about,
also singing and humming.
Literally, [HUMS],, that
can make a difference.
And if you don't believe
me, do it for five minutes.
And see how you feel.
This is something I think
people used to do in the shower.
But it seems like now we
just listen to something.
But maybe you should sing along.
Also, deep breathing,
like we just did,
will also help target
the vagal nerve.
There are new technologies
on the market now
that use vibration over
your wrists or ankles
or sternum to stimulate
your vagus nerve.
And they have profound effects
on your stress response.
So if you're feeling like
you need a hug, like you're
lacking touch, sometimes
that stimulation
will replicate a hug.
Or you could always increase
your heart rate variability
with a really good eight-second
hug that raises oxytocin.
That always works if you
have huggable friends.
Another hack for making
your body resilience
is called whole body vibration.
Now, NASA's been using
this to train astronauts
to recover better after
they lose muscle and bone
mass in space.
So they come back.
And then they get on
these vibration platforms.
You can find them at some
biohacking facilities.
And you might have one at home.
Cells in your body
are piezoelectric.
It means when you vibrate
them or flex them,
they generate a little
tiny bit of electricity
that can help your
body be more resilient.
Whole body vibration promotes
wound healing and bone density,
moves oxygen around
inside the body.
It helps to drain
your lymph system.
When you do those things,
your body feels less stress.
So, therefore, you
feel less stress.
Another big gun is
hyperbaric oxygen.
This is when you go into
a pressurized chamber.
And you breathe 100%
oxygen. Speeds up
wound healing, heals
traumatic brain injuries,
and it briefly increases the
production of reactive oxygen
species.
And this is oxidative stress.
But it's brief.
So it stimulates your stem
cells to make more stem cells.
They're using this
in doctor's offices
now after stroke
and brain injuries.
But it can help healthy
brains work better.
And studies in humans
who are perfectly healthy
showed daily hyperbaric
improved memory performance.
And it enhances functional
connectivity in different parts
of the brain.
Also, it'll turn on
mitochondrial biogenesis.
The more mitochondria you have,
the more resilient you are.
And it actually reduces
pro-inflammatory markers
in the body.
So it's interesting that
vibration or other therapies
like that that briefly cause
stress but allow the body
to recover, they
build resilience.
And I want you to understand how
to take yourself out of stress
and how to briefly introduce
stress and then take it out
again.
And there's also ozone therapy.
This has been used
for over 150 years
for sterilizing wounds
and treating infections.
It's a source of mild
oxidative stress.
And what that does is
activate a pathway called Nrf2
that's important for longevity.
And it helps your body make more
antioxidants, like glutathione.
It upregulates
heat shock protein
much like doing a sauna does.
And that helps to
fix protein folding.
It stimulates flow of
oxygen across cell membranes
so your cells are
more oxygenated.
And it makes your
mitochondria more efficient
at making energy.
In order to access
ozone therapy,
you can go to a doctor's office.
And you can do 10
pass intravenous ozone
for systemic effects.
Or you can do ozone therapy
at home via variety of ways.
There's videos on
my page about that.
And there's lots of
information online
about doing ozone therapy.
Do not breathe ozone gas.
It's not good for your lungs.
What you want to do
is stimulate your body
with these intense stressors
for very brief periods of time.
And then make sure you
return back to baseline.
These build resilience.
But if you're already out
of the resilient state
and you're stressed,
use what you just
learned in this episode in
order to bring yourself back
down into an unstressed state.
Become comfortable
in that state.
And then do these
little stressors.
And then recover quickly.
We are wired, especially
as biohackers,
to say, well, if some stress
is good, more stress is better.
So I'm just going to lean in.
And I'm going to push through.
And I'm going to have
grit and determination.
These are all things
that we all want.
And these are good things
to be able to turn on.
But when you turn
them on and leave them
on all the time, which is
what I did in my early career,
you are guaranteeing burnout.
So your job is to
dance with the edge
and to constantly
move the edge out
so you have more and
more and more capacity.
And one day, you wake up
and go, I have way more
energy than everyone around me.
As a biohacker,
you get to dial in
whether you're going to have
more stress that's good for you
or more stress that's
not good for you.
You get to choose how your
body responds to stress.
Are you taking adaptogens?
Or are you not?
Did you catch yourself getting
stressed for no good reason
and do a box breath?
These are tools that are
available to all humans.
They don't cost very much.
And many of them are free.
The reason I want you to
become a devoted biohacker
is that there is no
faster path to putting you
in charge of your own biology.
So you get to decide
how you show up.
Because after all, who
knows what you might do?
I'm Dave Asprey.
And this is biohacking.